Subtitles downloaded from https://kickasssubtitles.com
Elder Lerner said,
make your heart still.
We take them all. No,
never. We've won always.
That is the law. Bonding day is tomorrow.
These are yours. You are older.
I think of a sunset. Older.
Suna, which one sings to you?
So?
We will raise them together.
Like we were raised. It will be the same.
Go, go, go, go.
No.
It does not look like you, Anaya.
No one's scared.
Not Anaya.
Not Abe.
Echo, do not come in from that.
It was like a newborn.
Who won?
All must wait before bonding.
Even other teachers.
I am your mother.
I knew you would climb well.
He waits.
Okay.
Time for that later.
Your father. I want to see.
No.
Yes, Cora.
Suna.
Suna Ego does not like
work for tomorrow's ceremony.
You climb well.
Above darkness.
All of you?
No.
Only me.
That smell.
You did not go to the valley beyond.
It's forbidden.
Yet, blood of Echo.
Only a blanket.
We did not go to the valley.
Except... You
aren't true, no one.
Much to teach.
After tomorrow's bonding.
Now, elders must know.
Because...
Only print trouble.
Hold out.
Chase the passes away.
You'll climb the top nest.
Hello.
You see, your father?
I do not understand, Eagle Sun.
I do.
He hates Noah.
No.
With elders... they send
Hoda to scare Echo away.
When Mother was small,
dry seas in Shrank Creek.
Echo arranged for food.
She saw a small and a big.
We have good faith.
Our wives.
Our bonding is at sunrise.
Master, all birds will make exception.
They will not make
him wait for next season.
Yes, he will.
He is your father.
Then I am his son.
Then I will wait for you.
Naya, wait too.
You cannot.
Noah.
Hoda.
Over the horse!
Find his clown!
For Caesar!
Take them to Procterus.
Find the human!
I'm sorry, it's my fault.
No, for your life.
No.
I will find them.
I will bring them home.
Come to me.
No.
How young you are.
Without this.
Speak up.
Speak.
Up.
Not mine.
Them.
Explain yourself.
Thank you, my father.
Stoned my village.
I follow their tracks.
He was my village.
He killed him.
I am Raka.
He was outside when they arrived.
Did you see my clan?
No.
I hid.
I survived.
I protected our work.
They are an ancient way to store ideas.
The symbols have meaning.
Apes understood this meaning.
In the time of Caesar.
The masks in my village said that name.
Caesar.
Shameful.
The masks take his name.
Twist his words.
Who is he? Not his.
Once.
Your clan does not know the true Caesar.
Too many have forgotten.
I know.
Elders of my village, they made the law.
That is everything.
That is not everything.
Long before your elders, it was Caesar
who taught us what it means to be.
Ape.
He was our leader, our law-giver.
Apes, together, strong.
Ape shall not kill.
Ape.
We, the Order of Caesar,
follow his words to this day.
I follow.
I am now the last.
Continuous.
What is this place?
We believe Apes built
this as a refuge for humans.
Now it is rare to see even one but in
Caesar's time there were vast herds of them.
Can you imagine?
Perhaps here humans were cared for.
Then maybe even taught.
What is it?
You have seen one?
One.
They are scavengers.
Like boars, only lesser.
Humans are slow-witted
but there was a time.
When humans and apes lived side by side.
Yes, it is a puzzle, I know.
But they were important to Caesar.
So they are important to me.
I have to get to my horse.
Of course.
Follow me.
You do not know Caesar.
You do not know books.
You should stay here.
There is much I could teach you.
Go away!
No! Come back!
Pass!
Wait!
Come back!
There is so!
Danger!
That is the one.
So from my village.
She follows you from your village.
Perhaps Caesar bids me travel.
Wait here.
Work continues.
I have no time for it.
I will not slow you down.
I too keep it worse.
Can we not slow you down?
No.
I am sure she follows.
I do not know why.
A beautiful bird.
Eagle's son.
My father's bird.
He follows to taunt me.
This bird follows you too?
We raise eagles.
My clan.
Sing to them.
So they know us.
A bond.
Sing the song.
Please.
No.
My father was master of birds.
He sang two eagles.
But I am not him.
Shame.
I would have enjoyed a song.
Strange weapons.
Broken.
Raba.
Noah.
This is important.
They get cold.
Show mercy.
She is smarter than most.
We will name her Nova.
We name them all Nova.
I do not know why it is from Caesar's time.
Why did Caesar care so much for echos?
Legend says he was reared by them.
Impossible as that may seem.
Caesar Legend is important.
He was first elder.
He led with decency.
Morality.
Strength.
Caesar never had to
share camp with this Nova.
Oh!
The smell is potent.
A tunnel that eats light.
She saw what I saw.
It was in her eyes.
She reacted.
How? As April would.
If Echo comes, she must ride.
Is my young companion showing compassion
for our fellow traveler? She is slow.
Horse.
Also there is the gibbet.
Very, very long arms.
The most unfortunate that the
human can only use its feet for walking.
Imagine if you were falling from a tree.
You only have two
appendages to save your life.
But if you were able to use both
of your hands and both of your feet,
that's four times the safety.
And I imagine that if I
came across a special...
What is that?
Horses with strikes.
Quite striking.
We fear the hurt ceased to exist.
Will you not say goodbye?
I must find my clan.
The Nova stays with her kind.
You raise them up.
Follow Caesar's word.
To remember who he was.
It is important.
They are like you.
Would you like to
join them? He has his.
.. come.
Oh, she's here.
Parker!
This should give us...
What did I miss? She spoke.
She called my name.
You misheard.
You said this, Nova, was smarter than most.
With a reason, some
intelligence to be sure.
I have a name.
Meg.
I know where they're taking your clan.
It's a human settlement.
That's what I'm headed to.
Looking for more like me.
There are more.
Like you.
There used to be more.
You hid the truth.
Your mother taught me silence.
For my safety.
You were safe with us.
And still not true.
Where is your mother?
Now.
I am alone.
As are we.
But now.
We have each other.
Those have a fire.
We have much to discuss.
Vonnegut.
That's a good one.
Not a lot of fiction there.
I'm just mostly interested in history.
Roman history, especially.
My name is Trevathan.
Where are you from? You first.
Well, it doesn't really
matter, does it? I left.
Same as you.
Made it almost to the coast.
And then I fell and shattered my ankles.
That's where Proxima's found me.
And now you read him Roman history.
So, who are you?
I'm the human not helping the apes.
Noah! We must go.
Say his words.
Say his words! That felt good.
When I think of those
words, I feel good.
The Caesar requires stronger tomorrow.
Whoever's in there is either dead or gone.
We've been banging on that door for months.
Do you not know where we are?
When things got bad and the
government went underground,
this is where half of it went.
With all their technology
and all their weapons.
Don't you understand?
That ape cannot have what is inside.
You gotta stop thinking
about the way things were.
And start thinking about the way they are.
This is a good life.
And you have a chance to be a part of it.
What a build a world for the apes.
It is already their world.
There's hot water and fresh
clothes in that room back there.
You feel better when you
get yourself cleaned up.
Better figure out how to
be useful or I'll be good.
That's a fact.
We had no choice.
You must accept it is law.
The elders did not tell us
everything about this world.
They did not tell us
because they did not know.
They did not want to know.
You are different.
Go.
That's what we all want to talk about.
Hey, come. Come sit.
Please.
Wonderful day.
Yes? You two have
come a long way.
A night from the human traveling together.
Quite an adventure.
You are Noah, yes. Welcome, Noah.
Go.
May, you are familiar with
the concept of evolution.
That is, the human label.
The advancement that I crave requires time.
The vast amounts of
time that I do not have.
Unfortunately, I am but a mortal ape.
So this is why I need to give
the knowledge inside that vote.
I believe it will deliver
instant evolution.
No.
You don't understand.
In their time, humans were
capable of many great things.
They could level mountains.
They could speak cross oceans.
They could fly Noah like eagles fly.
But now we will learn.
Apes will learn. I will learn.
From what is inside that vault.
It's impossible.
No one's getting in there.
May, may, may, may.
My apes encountered law.
Companions.
I believe this map will belong to you.
You see, Noah.
Before she was travelling with you.
And then over the reign of 10
men was with other humans.
But sadly, my apes did
not realize their value.
So I was brought only bodies.
I could not speak to them
like I can speak to you.
I know you are coming
here to get inside my vault.
It is not yours!
All it is now, isn't it?
And I will get inside.
No matter how many apes it costs me.
And Noah, I have heard that
you are a very clever ape young.
Very clever. He repaired one
of your broken staffs traditionally.
Yeah.
I have much use for clever apes.
Now, can you tell me that may
tell you how to get inside my vault?
She told me nothing.
Oh, don't do that.
No.
Don't do nothing.
Noah, come with me.
Come, come.
I am so going to show you.
Come.
Tell me, what do you see?
Where there are two that can speak.
There must be more.
Inside my vault.
Them dangerous.
That is why I must have them first.
This is my kingdom.
Noah, let us eat.
Traitor.
They will not come.
Because eagle clan is gone.
Eagle clan...
Is he here? We are here.
A land of Proxima.
And Proxima has no need for eagles.
I judge myself.
Time for the evening lesson.
It would be very good for you to be there.
You did not come for echos.
And you were not alone.
I'm sorry.
Proxima is his ape's founder again.
They killed everyone.
I barely... I have escaped.
I needed your help.
And I was afraid... The more
you speak, the less I believe.
I was wrong not to trust you.
And I know that now.
I trust you only to help yourself.
But that could help me now.
I have questions.
You answer true.
Maybe I help.
What do you need inside the boat?
It's like a book.
A special book.
Special?
Humans lost their ability to speak.
And this book might bring it back.
A book can do
this? This one can.
Gracchus and apes and
humans lived side by side.
True or not true?
Apes were silent.
Like the echo.
Humans were dominant.
The virus spread.
That we created.
It made apes smarter.
And it almost killed all of us.
You know a way inside?
Yes.
And last question.
Will water destroy
what is inside? A climb.
One I cannot do alone.
This is me.
Hello, Sinan.
What do we do?
We're gonna need all of this.
Follow me.
The power runs through.
You cannot make a hard climb.
Without a knife.
This burns hot.
But under...explode.
Oh, shit.
Save her that way.
You like her.
Sinan.
We were born with him for some sense.
He's just going to rebuild it.
You had an opportunity.
I gave you an opportunity.
But you're fantasizing about a
past that can never come back.
Listen to me.
You think it's over.
Nobody is going to blame
you for what happened here.
Just... come with us.
Please.
He's going to skin your monkey alive.
And you... you're
going to learn.
No, no, no.
The symbols... have meaning.
Time to go.
Understand so many things.
Please.
You shall tell me the
place of this creature.
But I am not.
But I'm stinking of human.
Clear me up, I am! No! I see.
You can leave.
You can go.
For free.
More of those.
..
in there.
I can't have it.
Lay.
I'm sorry.
Lay!
You!
No!
So... so... what
you promised me...
Now stand.
Stand now! That's it.
Never end.
What is this?
A baked-in macrossfish.
Ah!
Humans will never give up.
Not until you claim all things...
for yourselves.
It was ours.
That silo was a human place.
With human things and human ideas,
it was not meant for apes.
What is for apes?
Should we go back to silence?
We will rebuild our home.
Better.
Stronger.
From what we have learned.
If Raka were here...
he would tell us his Caesar...
had much to say on this.
Was he right? And ape.
..
and human...
live together...
important.